Define OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_CONFIG_FILE to ignore other env vars, add env var substitution default syntax (#3948)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/configuration/sdk-environment-variables.md

| `OTEL_METRIC_EXPORT_INTERVAL` | The time interval (in milliseconds) between the start of two export attempts. | 60000   |       |
| `OTEL_METRIC_EXPORT_TIMEOUT`  | Maximum allowed time (in milliseconds) to export data.                        | 30000   |       |

## File Configuration

**Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md)

Environment variables involved in [file configuration](file-configuration.md).

| Name             | Description                                                                                                                                                                   | Default | Notes     |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|-----------|

> | OTEL_CONFIG_FILE | The path of the configuration file used to configure the SDK. If set, the configuration in this file takes precedence over all other SDK configuration environment variables. |         | See below |

Reviewer: would something like this unblock the config work and allow us to spend more time figuring out interop story?

```suggestion
| OTEL_CONFIG_FILE | The path of the configuration file used to configure the SDK. It's mutually exclusive with all other SDK configuration environment variables. If any stable environment variable is provided, the config is ignored. |         | See below |
```

Reviewer 2: Doing this de facto kills any environment variable substitution done from the config.yaml file itself.

The SDK can not refuse to use the config file because OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL is set, and at the same time load the config file which contains:

```
            endpoint: ${OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL:-http://localhost:-4318}
```

Reviewer: See my comment here - https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3948#issuecomment-2013958967

This is a first step to make env vars and config work together. 
I hope I explained why it's important and I hope eventually we can find a way for them to interop.

For now, env vars are stable and easy to use. The config is experimental. New experimental feature should not affect what's already working.

Reviewer: Another approach: ignore the config whenever conflict is detected as a first step - this way back-compat with env vars is guaranteed.
Over time this can change to a different conflict-resolution mechanism. But then changes and damage from them is self-contained within the experimental part of the spec and does not affect how stable parts of the spec work.

Reviewer: > Doing this de facto kills any environment variable substitution done from the config.yaml file itself.

would it still be necessary if there is interop with existing env vars? The placeholders are still super-cool and useful, just not as a way to interop with `OTEL_` env vars

Author: Resolving since the discussion has moved quite a bit since this comment.

| `OTEL_METRIC_EXPORT_TIMEOUT`  | Maximum allowed time (in milliseconds) to export data.                        | 30000   |       |

## File Configuration

**Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md)

Environment variables involved in [file configuration](file-configuration.md).

| Name                          | Description                                                                                                                                                                   | Default | Notes     |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|-----------|
| OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_CONFIG_FILE | The path of the configuration file used to configure the SDK. If set, the configuration in this file takes precedence over all other SDK configuration environment variables. |         | See below |

If `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_CONFIG_FILE` is set, the file at the specified path is used to

> call [Parse](file-configuration.md#parse). The

Reviewer 3: What is the recommended behavior when `Parse` fails (if for example the specified file doesn't exist, or contains errors)?

Should SDKs raise an exception or error (which needs to be caught or otherwise stops the program), or should the program continue without initialized SDK and just try to notify the user via SDK-specific logging?

Reviewer 4: From https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/configuration/file-configuration.md#parse

> Parse SHOULD return an error if:
> * The file doesn't exist or is invalid
> * The parsed file content does not conform to the [configuration model](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/configuration/file-configuration.md#configuration-model) schema.

Reviewer 3: > Parse SHOULD return an error if:

I wonder if a call to `Parse` is necessary when `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_CONFIG_FILE` should be used, I'm not exactly sure how those two should work together.

As far as I understand, `Parse` requires a `file` parameter. I assume that when `Parse` is called with a valid `file` parameter, then `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_CONFIG_FILE` is ignored? So I wonder how SDKs should implement the usage of `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_CONFIG_FILE`.

Author: > And I assume this will throw an exception if OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_CONFIG_FILE is set to a non-existent or invalid file?

Yes, since doing so would cause an error when calling `Parse` or `Create`. Then, an application [MAY fail fast](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/error-handling.md#basic-error-handling-principles):

> The API or SDK MAY fail fast and cause the application to fail on initialization, e.g. because of a bad user config or environment, but MUST NOT cause the application to fail later at run time, e.g. due to dynamic config settings received from the Collector.

resulting [configuration model](./file-configuration.md#configuration-model) is
used to call [Create](file-configuration.md#create) to produce fully configured
SDK components.

When `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_CONFIG_FILE` is set, all other environment variables
besides those referenced in the configuration file
for [environment variable substitution](file-configuration.md#environment-variable-substitution)

> MUST be ignored. Ignoring the environment variables is necessary because

Author: I _think_ so. The arguments to ignore env vars configuration are:
- The merge with other configuration produces unintuitive results, and can't be done consistently
- "what you see if what you get" semantics is easy to wrap your head around and implement

It seems likely those same arguments would apply to other the question of merging other .NET configuration mechanisms, but I would leave it to that group to decide what is best for the ecosystem.

there is no intuitive way to merge the flat environment variable scheme with the
structured file configuration scheme in all cases. Users that require merging
multiple sources of configuration are encouraged to customize the configuration
model returned by `Parse` before `Create` is called. For example, a user may
call `Parse` on multiple files and define logic from merging the resulting
configuration models, or overlay values from environment variables on top of a
configuration model. Implementations MAY provide a mechanism to customize the
configuration model parsed from `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_CONFIG_FILE`.

> Users are encouraged to use the `sdk-config.yaml` (TODO: Add link when

Reviewer 5: I think it should be `otel-config.yaml`, there can be plenty of SDKs.

available) as a starting point for `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_CONFIG_FILE`. This file
represents a common SDK configuration scenario, and includes environment
variable substitution references to environment variables which are otherwise

> ignored.

Reviewer 6: I would personally prefer not to have a starting point that references the (to be) deprecated env var names, as I think that will only further propagate the impression that those specific env vars still have some meaning.

(we could definitely provide a migration guide that contains a separate `sdk-migration-config.yaml` which references those deprecated env vars)

Reviewer 4: +1 as I also can see people being confused by this.

Author: I had the same thought. Can provide both I think.

Author: I've updated https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-configuration/pull/76 to include starter templates with and without env vars.
